development/getting-started.md, before:

# Getting Started

This page explains how to download and start changing our repositories.  If you haven't learnt how to clone a GitHub repository or run a Docker image before, you may like to read these first:

- [GitHub Quickstart](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/quickstart)
- [Docker orientation and setup](https://docs.docker.com/get-started/)

## Optional: Prepare the development server

Later on we'll need to install the development server.  This is a large download, so you might like to leave it running while you configure everything else.

[Get Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/) if it isn't already installed on your computer, then open a new terminal and run this command:

```bash
docker pull sleepdiaryproject/dev-server
```
    
You should see progress information for several downloads.  Minimise that window, but don't close it - we'll come back to it later.

## Fork and download our repositories

Log in to GitHub and go to [the list of sleepdiary repositories](https://github.com/orgs/sleepdiary/repositories).  Open each repository in turn, then click the repository's <em>fork</em> button to fork a new repository.

Once you've forked all your repositories, create a new folder called `sleepdiary` for them.   This is usually in your `Documents` folder (Windows) or home directory (Mac/Linux).  Then *clone* all your repositories into that folder.

## Run the development server

[Get Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/) if it isn't already installed on your computer.  If you prepared the development server before, unminimise that window and wait for your download to finish.

Open a terminal and run this command to install the development server:

```bash
docker run -v /path/to/sleepdiary:/app -d -p 8080-8090:8080-8090 --name sleepdiary_dev_server sleepdiaryproject/dev-server
```
    
Remember to change `/path/to/sleepdiary` to the folder you created in the previous step (e.g. `C:\Users\YourName\Documents\sleepdiary` or `/home/yourname/sleepdiary`).

This program will close as soon as the server is ready.  When that happens, go to [your development page](http://localhost:8080/dev-server/).

## Restart the development server

The development server doesn't restart automatically when you log in.  To start it again, run this command in a terminal:

```bash
docker restart sleepdiary_dev_server
```

Commit message:

Mention you don't have to get started

development/getting-started.md, after:

# Getting Started

If you just want to make a small change, it's fine to [file an issue](https://github.com/sleepdiary/sleepdiary.github.io/issues/new/choose), [start a discussion](https://github.com/sleepdiary/sleepdiary.github.io/discussions) or even [edit the file in GitHub](https://docs.github.com/en/github/managing-files-in-a-repository/managing-files-on-github/editing-files-in-your-repository) and [create a pull request](https://docs.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/creating-a-pull-request).  It takes a while to get started with a new codebase, and there's no point wasting all that time for a one-off.

This page explains how to download and start changing our repositories.  If you haven't learnt how to clone a GitHub repository or run a Docker image before, you may like to read these first:

- [GitHub Quickstart](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/quickstart)
- [Docker orientation and setup](https://docs.docker.com/get-started/)

## Optional: Prepare the development server

Later on we'll need to install the development server.  This is a large download, so you might like to leave it running while you configure everything else.

[Get Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/) if it isn't already installed on your computer, then open a new terminal and run this command:

```bash
docker pull sleepdiaryproject/dev-server
```
    
You should see progress information for several downloads.  Minimise that window, but don't close it - we'll come back to it later.

## Fork and download our repositories

Log in to GitHub and go to [the list of sleepdiary repositories](https://github.com/orgs/sleepdiary/repositories).  Open each repository in turn, then click the repository's <em>fork</em> button to fork a new repository.

Once you've forked all your repositories, create a new folder called `sleepdiary` for them.   This is usually in your `Documents` folder (Windows) or home directory (Mac/Linux).  Then *clone* all your repositories into that folder.

## Run the development server

[Get Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/) if it isn't already installed on your computer.  If you prepared the development server before, unminimise that window and wait for your download to finish.

Open a terminal and run this command to install the development server:

```bash
docker run -v /path/to/sleepdiary:/app -d -p 8080-8090:8080-8090 --name sleepdiary_dev_server sleepdiaryproject/dev-server
```
    
Remember to change `/path/to/sleepdiary` to the folder you created in the previous step (e.g. `C:\Users\YourName\Documents\sleepdiary` or `/home/yourname/sleepdiary`).

This program will close as soon as the server is ready.  When that happens, go to [your development page](http://localhost:8080/dev-server/).

## Restart the development server

The development server doesn't restart automatically when you log in.  To start it again, run this command in a terminal:

```bash
docker restart sleepdiary_dev_server
```
